README.md, before:

# 🦤 DODO: Digital Ocean Deployment Orchestrator

[![python 3.14](https://img.shields.io/badge/3.14-4584b6?logo=python&logoColor=ffde57)](https://docs.python.org/3.14/whatsnew/3.14.html)
[![uv](https://img.shields.io/endpoint?url=https://raw.githubusercontent.com/astral-sh/uv/main/assets/badge/v0.json&labelColor=261230&color=de60e9)](https://github.com/astral-sh/uv)
[![IPython](https://img.shields.io/badge/IP[y]:-3465a4)](https://ipython.readthedocs.io/en/stable/)
[![structlog](https://img.shields.io/badge/🪵_structlog-b9a198)](https://github.com/hynek/structlog)
[![pre-commit](https://img.shields.io/badge/pre--commit-FAB040?logo=pre-commit&logoColor=1f2d23)](https://github.com/pre-commit/pre-commit)
[![ruff](https://img.shields.io/endpoint?url=https://raw.githubusercontent.com/astral-sh/ruff/main/assets/badge/v2.json&labelColor=261230&color=d8ff64)](https://github.com/astral-sh/ruff)
[![pytest](https://img.shields.io/badge/pytest-0A9EDC?logo=pytest&logoColor=white)](https://github.com/pytest-dev/pytest)
[![nox](https://img.shields.io/badge/%F0%9F%A6%8A-Nox-D85E00.svg)](https://github.com/wntrblm/nox)
[![coverage](https://img.shields.io/badge/😴_coverage-59aabd)](https://coverage.readthedocs.io/)
[![security: bandit](https://img.shields.io/badge/security-bandit-yellow.svg)](https://github.com/PyCQA/bandit)
[![Release Please](https://img.shields.io/badge/📦_Release_Please-6C97BB)](https://github.com/googleapis/release-please)

A Python package to

- write declarative plans for infrastructure on Digital Ocean
- create infrastructure from those plans
- manage blue/green deployments of containerised webapps

With extensions to

- manage DNS records via Cloudflare

Designed to

- easily fit into a CI/CD environment such as GitHub Actions

While avoiding the complexity, pitfalls and overextension of tools like Terraform.

## Quickstart

```sh
# in your Python project, add the following to the dependencies table in `pyproject.toml`
"digitalocean_deployment_orchestrator @ https://github.com/albertomh/DODO/releases/download/v0.4.0/digitalocean_deployment_orchestrator-0.4.0-py3-none-any.whl"

# create a blueprint for a 'test' environment
cp DODO/docs/demo/env_blueprints/_sample.py.txt myapp/infra/env_blueprints/test.py
# edit the contents of the `test.py` blueprint ...

# prepare your local environment
uv sync
export DIGITALOCEAN__TOKEN=dop_v1_123...

# plan & create infrastructure for the 'test' environment
uv run python \
    -m digitalocean_deployment_orchestrator.infra.apply \
    $(pwd)/env_blueprints \
    test [--no-dry-run]

# perform a blue/green deployment in each droplet in the 'test' environment
uv run python -m digitalocean_deployment_orchestrator.list_droplet_IPs test | \
    xargs -r -n1 -I{} bash -c '
    IP="{}"
    ssh -o StrictHostKeyChecking=no admin@"$IP" "
        sudo mkdir -p /etc/myapp/_deploy/ &&
        sudo chown admin:admin /etc/myapp/_deploy/
    " &&
    scp -o StrictHostKeyChecking=no pyproject.toml .env admin@"$IP":/etc/myapp/_deploy/ &&
    ssh -t admin@"$IP" "
        cd /etc/myapp/_deploy/ &&
        uv run python -m digitalocean_deployment_orchestrator.deploy.blue_green_deploy \
        --image 'githubuser/myapp:latest' \
        --ghcr-username 'githubuser' \
        --gh-pat 'github_pat_123...' \
        --name 'myapp' \
        --env-file '/etc/myapp/_deploy/.env'
    "
'
```

## Prerequisites

To use `DODO` the following must be available locally:

- [Python 3.14](https://docs.python.org/3.14/) or above
- [uv](https://docs.astral.sh/uv/)

## Environment Variables

The following manual configuration is a pre-requisite for DODO to be able to plan and
create infrastructure:

### Digital Ocean credentials

1. Create a Digital Ocean API token <https://cloud.digitalocean.com/account/api/tokens>
    1. Set an expiration date
    2. Set Custom Scopes:
        - droplet: `create`, `update`, `delete`
        - ssh_key: `read`
        - tag: `create`
2. Set env. var. `DIGITALOCEAN__TOKEN` to the value of the API token.

### Cloudflare credentials

Optionally, if you are using Cloudflare to serve DNS records:

1. Create a Cloudflare API token <https://dash.cloudflare.com/profile/api-tokens>
    1. Set Permissions:
        - Zone:Read
        - DNS:Edit
    2. Include only the Zone you are targeting.
2. Set env. var. `CLOUDFLARE__TOKEN` to the value of the API token.

## Develop

IPython is available as the default shell. Start an interactive session with:

```sh
uv run ipython
```

### pycliche

`DODO` has been generated using the [pycliche](https://github.com/albertomh/pycliche)
project template.

To update `DODO` to a newer version of `pycliche`:

```sh
cd ~/Projects/DODO/
uvx copier update --skip-answered --trust [--vcs-ref=<TAG>]
```

If the `--vcs-ref` flag is not specified, `copier` will use the latest `pycliche` tag.

### Git principles

This repo follows trunk-based development. This means:

- the `main` branch should always be in a releasable state
- use short-lived feature branches

### Development prerequisites

In addition to the [Prerequisites](#prerequisites) above, you will need the following to
develop `DODO`:

- [pre-commit](https://pre-commit.com/)

### Dependency management

Dependencies are defined in the `pyproject.toml` file, with exact versions captured by a
`uv.lock` lockfile. `uv` is used to manage dependencies:

```sh
# add a dependency to the project
uv add some-package
```

Dependabot is configured to run weekly and update Python packages (minor & patch) and
GitHub Actions. See [.github/dependabot.yaml](.github/dependabot.yaml).

### Logging

`DODO` uses [structlog](https://www.structlog.org/en/stable/) for structured logging.
The logging configuration is defined in `logging.py`. Use the `configure_logging` function
to set up logging when the application starts:

```python
import structlog

from digitalocean_deployment_orchestrator.logging import configure_logging

configure_logging()

logger = structlog.get_logger()
logger.info("DODO running", key="value")
```

### Style

Code style is enforced by pre-commit hooks. Linter rules are configured in the `ruff`
tables in `pyproject.toml`.

```sh
# before you start developing, install pre-commit hooks
pre-commit install
```

Docstrings should follow the conventions set out in the [Google styleguide](https://google.github.io/styleguide/pyguide.html#38-comments-and-docstrings).

Please follow the [Conventional Commits](https://www.conventionalcommits.org/en/v1.0.0/)
guidelines when writing commit messages. `commitlint` is enabled as a pre-commit hook.
Valid commit types are defined in `.commitlintrc.ts`.

## Test

`pytest` and `coverage` are defined as test dependencies.

Run all tests and report on code coverage:

```sh
nox
```

By default this will only run the `nox` session for the latest supported Python release.

To run all `nox` sessions (ie. for all supported Python releases):

```sh
nox -k tests
```

Pass flags as you normally would to `pytest` by placing them after `--` eg.

```sh
nox -- -k some_keyword_expression
```

### Test marks

Tests can have marks, allowing you to run only a subset:

```sh
nox -- -m unit
# or
nox -- -m "not smoke"
```

See the `tool.pytest.ini_options` table in `pyproject.toml` for a list of all marks.

### Python versions & coverage

Nox is used to automate testing across different Python versions. Test sessions are
configured via `noxfile.py`. `coverage` reporting will only run for test runs for the
oldest and latest Python versions.

### Tests in GitHub Actions

A matrix strategy is used for the `test` GitHub Action. This runs each Nox session
(i.e. Python version test run) as a separate pipeline job.

## Release

[Release Please](https://github.com/googleapis/release-please) is used to automate:

- Updating the [changelog](CHANGELOG.md).
- Calculating the new SemVer tag based on conventional commit types.
- Creating a new GitHub release.

Release Please is configured as a GitHub action ([release-please.yaml](.github/workflows/release-please.yaml)).
It keeps a release pull request open that is refreshed as changes are merged into `main`.
To cut a release, simply merge the release pull request.

### GitHub Personal Access Token

In order for Release Please to automate the above process, a GitHub Actions secret called
`RELEASE_PLEASE_TOKEN` must exist in GitHub (under digitalocean-deployment-orchestrator/settings/secrets/actions).
The contents of this secret must be a Personal Access Token (PAT) with the following permissions:

```text
contents: write
pull-requests: write
```

For more information, consult the [release-please-action project](https://github.com/googleapis/release-please-action).

## Build & package

DODO uses the hatchling build system and the `uv` toolchain to package releases. Build a
release by:

```sh
# merge a release-please PR to create a tag and a GitHub Release

# check out the tag locally

# in this project's root directory
uv build

# upload the artefacts as an asset linked to the release
# <https://github.com/albertomh/DODO/releases/tag/vM.m.p>
```

To use DODO as a dependency in a project:

```sh
# add the following line to the dependencies table in `pyproject.toml`:
"digitalocean_deployment_orchestrator @ https://github.com/albertomh/DODO/releases/download/vM.m.p/digitalocean_deployment_orchestrator-M.m.p-py3-none-any.whl"

uv sync
```

Run modules directly once installed as a dependency:

```sh
uv run python -m digitalocean_deployment_orchestrator.list_droplet_IPs $ENV_NAME
```

---

&copy; Alberto Morón Hernández

Commit message:

docs: add section on env. blueprints to README

README.md, after:

# 🦤 DODO: Digital Ocean Deployment Orchestrator

[![python 3.14](https://img.shields.io/badge/3.14-4584b6?logo=python&logoColor=ffde57)](https://docs.python.org/3.14/whatsnew/3.14.html)
[![uv](https://img.shields.io/endpoint?url=https://raw.githubusercontent.com/astral-sh/uv/main/assets/badge/v0.json&labelColor=261230&color=de60e9)](https://github.com/astral-sh/uv)
[![IPython](https://img.shields.io/badge/IP[y]:-3465a4)](https://ipython.readthedocs.io/en/stable/)
[![structlog](https://img.shields.io/badge/🪵_structlog-b9a198)](https://github.com/hynek/structlog)
[![pre-commit](https://img.shields.io/badge/pre--commit-FAB040?logo=pre-commit&logoColor=1f2d23)](https://github.com/pre-commit/pre-commit)
[![ruff](https://img.shields.io/endpoint?url=https://raw.githubusercontent.com/astral-sh/ruff/main/assets/badge/v2.json&labelColor=261230&color=d8ff64)](https://github.com/astral-sh/ruff)
[![pytest](https://img.shields.io/badge/pytest-0A9EDC?logo=pytest&logoColor=white)](https://github.com/pytest-dev/pytest)
[![nox](https://img.shields.io/badge/%F0%9F%A6%8A-Nox-D85E00.svg)](https://github.com/wntrblm/nox)
[![coverage](https://img.shields.io/badge/😴_coverage-59aabd)](https://coverage.readthedocs.io/)
[![security: bandit](https://img.shields.io/badge/security-bandit-yellow.svg)](https://github.com/PyCQA/bandit)
[![Release Please](https://img.shields.io/badge/📦_Release_Please-6C97BB)](https://github.com/googleapis/release-please)

A Python package to

- write declarative plans for Digital Ocean infrastructure in plain Python
- programmatically create infrastructure following those plans
- manage blue/green deployments of containerised webapps

With extensions to

- manage DNS records via Cloudflare

Designed to

- easily fit into a CI/CD environment such as GitHub Actions

While avoiding the complexity, pitfalls and overextension of tools like Terraform.

## Quickstart

```sh
# in your Python project, add the following to the dependencies table in `pyproject.toml`
"digitalocean_deployment_orchestrator @ https://github.com/albertomh/DODO/releases/download/v0.4.0/digitalocean_deployment_orchestrator-0.4.0-py3-none-any.whl"

# create a blueprint for a 'test' environment
cp DODO/docs/demo/env_blueprints/_sample.py.txt myapp/infra/env_blueprints/test.py
# edit the contents of the `test.py` blueprint ...

# prepare your local environment
uv sync
export DIGITALOCEAN__TOKEN=dop_v1_123...

# plan & create infrastructure for the 'test' environment
uv run python \
    -m digitalocean_deployment_orchestrator.infra.apply \
    $(pwd)/env_blueprints \
    test [--no-dry-run]

# perform a blue/green deployment in each droplet in the 'test' environment
uv run python -m digitalocean_deployment_orchestrator.list_droplet_IPs test | \
    xargs -r -n1 -I{} bash -c '
    IP="{}"
    ssh -o StrictHostKeyChecking=no admin@"$IP" "
        sudo mkdir -p /etc/myapp/_deploy/ &&
        sudo chown admin:admin /etc/myapp/_deploy/
    " &&
    scp -o StrictHostKeyChecking=no pyproject.toml .env admin@"$IP":/etc/myapp/_deploy/ &&
    ssh -t admin@"$IP" "
        cd /etc/myapp/_deploy/ &&
        uv run python -m digitalocean_deployment_orchestrator.deploy.blue_green_deploy \
        --image 'githubuser/myapp:latest' \
        --ghcr-username 'githubuser' \
        --gh-pat 'github_pat_123...' \
        --name 'myapp' \
        --env-file '/etc/myapp/_deploy/.env'
    "
'
```

## Prerequisites

To use `DODO` the following must be available locally:

- [Python 3.14](https://docs.python.org/3.14/) or above
- [uv](https://docs.astral.sh/uv/)

## Environment Variables

The following manual configuration is a pre-requisite for `DODO` to be able to plan and
create infrastructure:

### Digital Ocean credentials

1. Create a Digital Ocean API token <https://cloud.digitalocean.com/account/api/tokens>
    1. Set an expiration date
    2. Set Custom Scopes:
        - droplet: `create`, `update`, `delete`
        - ssh_key: `read`
        - tag: `create`
2. Set env. var. `DIGITALOCEAN__TOKEN` to the value of the API token.

### Cloudflare credentials

Optionally, if you are using Cloudflare to serve DNS records:

1. Create a Cloudflare API token <https://dash.cloudflare.com/profile/api-tokens>
    1. Set Permissions:
        - Zone:Read
        - DNS:Edit
    2. Include only the Zone you are targeting.
2. Set env. var. `CLOUDFLARE__TOKEN` to the value of the API token.

## Create and use environment blueprints

`DODO` revolves around creating 'environment blueprints' that declaratively define
resources for a given environment. These blueprints are plain Python modules that import
classes from `digitalocean_deployment_orchestrator` and combine them to create your
infrastructure.

Most of the building blocks `DODO` provides are `TypedDict`s and `Enum`s, meaning they
pair well with type checks and IDE code completion.

The expected use is to create a 'blueprints' directory and pass this as an argument when
calling `digitalocean_deployment_orchestrator.infra.apply`.  
This blueprints directory will contain one or more Python modules, named after the
[environment](src/digitalocean_deployment_orchestrator/types.py#L56) they define, eg. `test.py`.

The only requirement for writing a blueprint module is that it must contain a top-level
attribute called `BLUEPRINT` which must be an [`EnvironmentBlueprint`](src/digitalocean_deployment_orchestrator/infra/types.py#L9)
object. Construct a full environment by following the breadcrumb trail of fields & types
cascading from that initial `BLUEPRINT` object.

The file at `docs/demo/env_blueprints/_sample.py.txt` provides a starting point for your
first environment blueprint.

### Digital Ocean Droplets

## Develop

IPython is available as the default shell. Start an interactive session with:

```sh
uv run ipython
```

### pycliche

`DODO` has been generated using the [pycliche](https://github.com/albertomh/pycliche)
project template.

To update `DODO` to a newer version of `pycliche`:

```sh
cd ~/Projects/DODO/
uvx copier update --skip-answered --trust [--vcs-ref=<TAG>]
```

If the `--vcs-ref` flag is not specified, `copier` will use the latest `pycliche` tag.

### Git principles

This repo follows trunk-based development. This means:

- the `main` branch should always be in a releasable state
- use short-lived feature branches

### Development prerequisites

In addition to the [Prerequisites](#prerequisites) above, you will need the following to
develop `DODO`:

- [pre-commit](https://pre-commit.com/)

### Dependency management

Dependencies are defined in the `pyproject.toml` file, with exact versions captured by a
`uv.lock` lockfile. `uv` is used to manage dependencies:

```sh
# add a dependency to the project
uv add some-package
```

Dependabot is configured to run weekly and update Python packages (minor & patch) and
GitHub Actions. See [.github/dependabot.yaml](.github/dependabot.yaml).

### Logging

`DODO` uses [structlog](https://www.structlog.org/en/stable/) for structured logging.
The logging configuration is defined in `logging.py`. Use the `configure_logging` function
to set up logging when the application starts:

```python
import structlog

from digitalocean_deployment_orchestrator.logging import configure_logging

configure_logging()

logger = structlog.get_logger()
logger.info("DODO running", key="value")
```

### Style

Code style is enforced by pre-commit hooks. Linter rules are configured in the `ruff`
tables in `pyproject.toml`.

```sh
# before you start developing, install pre-commit hooks
pre-commit install
```

Docstrings should follow the conventions set out in the [Google styleguide](https://google.github.io/styleguide/pyguide.html#38-comments-and-docstrings).

Please follow the [Conventional Commits](https://www.conventionalcommits.org/en/v1.0.0/)
guidelines when writing commit messages. `commitlint` is enabled as a pre-commit hook.
Valid commit types are defined in `.commitlintrc.ts`.

## Test

`pytest` and `coverage` are defined as test dependencies.

Run all tests and report on code coverage:

```sh
nox
```

By default this will only run the `nox` session for the latest supported Python release.

To run all `nox` sessions (ie. for all supported Python releases):

```sh
nox -k tests
```

Pass flags as you normally would to `pytest` by placing them after `--` eg.

```sh
nox -- -k some_keyword_expression
```

### Test marks

Tests can have marks, allowing you to run only a subset:

```sh
nox -- -m unit
# or
nox -- -m "not smoke"
```

See the `tool.pytest.ini_options` table in `pyproject.toml` for a list of all marks.

### Python versions & coverage

Nox is used to automate testing across different Python versions. Test sessions are
configured via `noxfile.py`. `coverage` reporting will only run for test runs for the
oldest and latest Python versions.

### Tests in GitHub Actions

A matrix strategy is used for the `test` GitHub Action. This runs each Nox session
(i.e. Python version test run) as a separate pipeline job.

## Release

[Release Please](https://github.com/googleapis/release-please) is used to automate:

- Updating the [changelog](CHANGELOG.md).
- Calculating the new SemVer tag based on conventional commit types.
- Creating a new GitHub release.

Release Please is configured as a GitHub action ([release-please.yaml](.github/workflows/release-please.yaml)).
It keeps a release pull request open that is refreshed as changes are merged into `main`.
To cut a release, simply merge the release pull request.

### GitHub Personal Access Token

In order for Release Please to automate the above process, a GitHub Actions secret called
`RELEASE_PLEASE_TOKEN` must exist in GitHub (under digitalocean-deployment-orchestrator/settings/secrets/actions).
The contents of this secret must be a Personal Access Token (PAT) with the following permissions:

```text
contents: write
pull-requests: write
```

For more information, consult the [release-please-action project](https://github.com/googleapis/release-please-action).

## Build & package

`DODO` uses the hatchling build system and the `uv` toolchain to package releases. Build a
release by:

```sh
# merge a release-please PR to create a tag and a GitHub Release

# check out the tag locally

# in this project's root directory
uv build

# upload the artefacts as an asset linked to the release
# <https://github.com/albertomh/DODO/releases/tag/vM.m.p>
```

To use `DODO` as a dependency in a project:

```sh
# add the following line to the dependencies table in `pyproject.toml`:
"digitalocean_deployment_orchestrator @ https://github.com/albertomh/DODO/releases/download/vM.m.p/digitalocean_deployment_orchestrator-M.m.p-py3-none-any.whl"

uv sync
```

Run modules directly once installed as a dependency:

```sh
uv run python -m digitalocean_deployment_orchestrator.list_droplet_IPs $ENV_NAME
```

---

&copy; Alberto Morón Hernández
